normally astronaut training takes about
one full year and it includes such
subjects as
astronomy astrophysics flight physiology
orbital trajectories or orbital
management another part of the astronaut
basic training is survival training
in the days of gemiini you never knew
for sure where a spacecraft might land
if there was an emergency
deorbit so we had to take desert
training
water training and and jungle survival
so we had to learn how to cook and eat
snake and all other
such other good things as that and how
to make water in the desert
uh after that year and a half of
astronaut basic training our
names were all put on a list and that
list was quite a bit longer at that time
than there were seats available
and so we were all given other duties to
keep us occupied and to help continue
our training
five of us were assigned to the lunar
module
and our job was to be with these lunar
modules as they were being
built so we spent a lot of time there
i must admit that probably i have more
time sleeping on the floor of lunar
module number six
than the crew who flew it on the moon
well my next job was to be
on the support crew of apollo 8 and
apollo 8 was the spacecraft that flew to
the moon and came back but did not land
when they went behind the moon they were
supposed to do a thrusting maneuver to
slow them down so they'd be captured
into
lunar orbit so we just had to sit and
cool our heels
when they went behind the moon and we
knew if they came out a little early on
the other side
that they had not burned enough
not slowed down enough and we're going
to just skip out into space they
wouldn't be captured in orbit
if they came out a little bit late that
meant they had overdone it
that meant they weren't going to be in
orbit but we're going to begin a spiral
down to the lunar surface
and of course without a lunar module it
kind of ruins your whole day
you can imagine how relieved we were at
the instant
that they were supposed to appear on the
other side of the moon
that they appeared my next assignment
was again a support crew assignment on
apollo 12 and apollo 12 was
struck by lightning on its way off the
pad a nearby thunderstorm uh there was a
lightning bolt that went over and
hit the very tip of the spacecraft went
down the charge went down through the
spacecraft
through the booster down the exhaust
gases and ground it out on the
launching pad it killed the electrical
power system
and the computers all died you can
imagine what it must have been like for
them inside because
suddenly the lights all went out and
then they came back on when the
batteries picked up the load
and every single warning light and
caution light in the spacecraft was on
and flashing
and all of the necessary bells whistles
and buzzers and things that are in there
all were going off at the same time the
crew was totally confused as to what was
going on
when we were settled in orbit we uh
tested all the
uh the various systems and everything
looked good so that now i figured this
is it
and sure enough i did get an assignment
a flight assignment i was assigned to
the
backup crew of apollo 16 which meant
that i was to be on the prime crew
of apollo 19. and several weeks into the
training nasa made the surprise
announcement that they were going to
cancel
apollos 18 19 and 20. we were in the
middle of the vietnam war
the budget was in bad shape so you could
imagine there were three very very sad
hang dog guys moping around the office
because we lost our flight to the moon
but
several weeks later i got a call from
tom stafford the
senior astronaut at that time and he
wanted me in his office and i went in
and he told me that
he was sorry that i had missed my
opportunity for the moon but he said
i've got another assignment for you he
said i want you to be the commander
of the third and final uh skylab mission
and he said do you think he could do the
job and i said of course yes
but i'll have to admit a certain uh lump
in
in my in my chest and in my stomach
because i was a rookie
and they normally don't assign a rookie
to be a commander
uh usually you have to have at least one
flight under your belt but uh
they assigned me to that which was
really kind of a shock
because the last rookie commander was
neil armstrong on gemini 8.
you